One of the most important concept in Git and GitHub is branching and merging.
So let's try to understand this concepts.
Let's say you have a project running, you have a bunch of files committed in both local repository
and remote repository.
Then a team member comes and she's saying, I'm working on a new feature feature one in Real World Project.
You need a mechanism for her to work separately so that it doesn't impact the file one, which is running
fine.
So to do that, you use branches.
So when you push a changes to the repository, by default a branch is created.
That branch is called master.
To work on additional features.
You can create separate branches.
So in this case, she can create this branch named feature one.
She can make all her changes in this branch, and then someone can review the changes.
And if everything is fine, then march to the master branch using a pull request.
Now let's not get ahead of ourselves.
Let's understand in detail how branching works in local.
And then we're going to take a look at an actual example with GitHub.
When you create a folder in your local desktop and then you commit a file, let's say file one git automatically
creates this branch called master and this diagram represents the git history graph or git branch graph.
You will see this in real world projects as well.
The circle signifies the commit ID for each comment.
So in this case we have one circle because so far we have only committed once in the branch master to
create a branch.
You run this command gate branch and the name of the branch.
In this case we are working on feature one, so we are running Git branch feature one and the branch
will be created.
Now note that the branch feature one is just looking at the same commit id.
So a couple of important things to remember.
Branch can only be created from existing branch by default.
Branch master is created and you are sitting on the master branch.
So whenever you run this git branch feature one, the new branch is created and it looks at the latest
commit ID in the master branch and branches are just references to commit.
No code is copied.
That's why when you create different branches, git does it super fast compared to other version control
system.
When you create a branch, a whole bunch of code gets copied, which is not the case.
Forget when you have two different branches, you need to switch branches and work on different features.
How do you know which branch you are on currently that is determined by this pointer called Head.
You can switch branches by running the command git switch name of the branch or you could do git check
out name of the branch.
Git switch is more appropriate for switching branches.
So that's the command we are going to use throughout this course.
So let's say you switch branch to feature one, you modified file one and you added a new file index.html
you commit to feature one branch and all of this is happening in local repository.
So how would the gate history graph look after doing all these changes?
So at this point, the feature one branch will move one comet ahead of the master branch.
This new circle is the comet ID for modified file one and indexed HTML.
What this means is if you are at the branch master and look at file one, you will see the older file.
But if you are sitting in the branch feature one and look at the file one, you will see the modified
file one as well as indexed HTML.
If you want Master Branch to stay up to date with this changes, you need to switch the head to Master
Branch and you do this by running git switch master which brings the head down to the master and then
you run the command get merge feature one.
Basically the command is get merge and then give the name of the branch where there are additional commits
and then those changes will be merged into the branch that you are sitting on.
You do not need to give the name of the branch that you are sitting on.
That's why we did not give the name master and get merge, which are one command.
Once you run this command, the branch master will move ahead and it will look at the latest comment.
Note that this just made the master branch move to look at the latest comet ID.
This is called a fast forward merge and this is only possible because no changes were made on Master
Branch.
All it did was move the master branch to look at the latest comet ID and match with feature one branch.
But what if there are changes in multiple branches?
So going back to the previous scenario, while you made the change in feature one branch, you may switch
back to master and do a change in the master branch as well.
In this case, you committed file two in the master branch.
So now the master branch and feature one branch is out of sync.
How are we going to merge the changes?
So let's think about it.
Changes made on both branches.
Just moving the branch to look at the new commit.
ID won't do merge.
So previously all we did was moving the branch master to look at the new commit ID for feature one branch.
Let's say we do that, but that doesn't solve it, right?
Because then the branch master and feature one both looking at the commit ID for modified file one and
index.html, and none of them are looking for the commit ID for file two, which is not correct.
Similarly if you just move the branch feature one to look at the latest commit ID for Master Branch,
then you leave the modified file one in that HTML comet.
So to solve it we do recursive three way march we run get switch master and then we run get merge feature
one.
And what that would do is it will combine the comet ID for file two and comet ID for modified file one
and index.html and it will create a new comet ID for this merge.
It is named three way march because it uses three comets to generate this march, comet ID, the two
branch tapes and their common ancestor.
Sometimes it will be called recursive merge, sometimes it will be called three way march.
But don't get confused.
They are the same thing.
So good news is Gitte will automatically choose whether to run a fast forward march or a three way march.
You do not need to tell it which one to choose and once you merge all the changes to the master branch,
you delete the feature branch.
You do this by running gate branch, dash dx as in delete and the name of the branch you want to delete.
So now a brainteaser for you guys and girls.
Let's say the head is in the branch master and this is the current branch graph.
Now if I run the command get switch feature one and then get branch feature to which commit ID the blue
one or the orange one will feature two branch look at and where does the head go?
Pause the video and think for a minute.
All right.
So when you do get switch feature one, the head goes to feature one.
So currently you are sitting at the branch feature one.
And then when you run, get a branch feature.
To remember, a branch is always a copy of an existing commit since you were sitting at the branch feature
one the feature two branch will be looking at the latest commit ID from feature one and creating new
branch does not change the head unless you explicitly switch to the new branch.
Another alternate way of doing this would be get branch feature to specify feature one.
So basically Git branch, give the name of the new branch and then the old branch to reference.
In this method the new branch will be created, but the head will still be sitting at the master branch
to do changes in the branch feature one or feature two.
You do need to explicitly switch the head to feature one or feature two.
Now that we understand how branching and merging works in your local, let's take a look at how this
looks with remote GitHub.